© 20 21, RAFT     
 
 
 
 
 
Curriculum topics  
• Characteristics of Life  
• Forces & Motion  
• Scientific 
Investigations  
 
Subjec ts 
• Life Science  
• Physical Science  
 
Grade range: K – 2 
 
Who we are:  Resource 
Area for Teaching ( RAFT ) 
helps transform the 
learning experience by 
inspiring joy through 
hands -on learning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Share Your feedback!  
http://bit.ly/RAFTkitsurvey    
 
 
CRITTER CAPSULE  
It moves! Is it alive?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investigate motion, center of mass, inertia , and the characteristics of living 
organisms  in this fun and intriguing project!  The key to the capsule’s tumbling 
motion is concealed by foil which adds to its mysterious nature and provides an 
opportunity to practice observation and other science investigation  skills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       


CRITTER CAPSULE  (SUBSCRIPTION)  page 2       © 20 21, RAFT  Materials  
Materials in the kit may vary but g enerally, this kit contains the following : 
 
• Capsule, size #11  (1) 
• Steel ball or marble, 15 -18 mm  (1) 
• Foil sheet, 3” x 3”  (1) 
• Plate, paper or plastic, rim wider than 
capsule diameter  (1)  
WARNING: CHOKING HAZARD  
Activity uses small parts. Not for children 
under 3 yrs.
 
 
To Do and Notice 
 
• NOTE: Capsules made of gelatin are water -soluble. Keep them away from moisture. Separate the two 
parts of the capsule and enclose the steel ball or marble in the capsule. Push the capsule parts together 
securely, as shown  below . 
 
                                         
 
 
Wrap the foil around the capsule. Pinch the foil over the ends of the capsule, then carefully round the foil 
over each end (see above right ). 
 
Put the assembled C ritter Capsule in the palm of your hand. Tilt your hand back and forth and observe 
the motion of the capsule.  
 
Hold the plate right side up and put the Critter Capsule onto the plate. Tilt the plate back and forth and 
observe the capsule’s motion. Can the capsule be made to travel in a circle?   
 
Turn the plate upside down and put the Critter Capsule onto the plate’s rim (see below ). Can you make 
the capsule travel around the rim without falling out? Keep trying until you are successful!  
 
Optional:  Place the Critter Capsule on an incline/ramp (see page  1). If the capsule does not move give it a 
slight push or make the incline steeper. Observe the capsule’s motion.  
 
Characteristics of living things include metabolism, reproduction, growth and development, re sponse to 
the environment, and being made of cells. Does the Critter Capsule meet any of these criteria? How 
would you determine whether it’s a living thing without opening it up? Develop your own criteria for 
deciding if the Critter Capsule is alive. Use the criteria to evaluate a variety of familiar household objects . 
 
Share  your Critter Capsule exploration  with RAFT! Submit photos/video via email  at education@raft.net   
or on social media  (Facebook , Twitter , Instagram ). 
           
 
1 
2 
3
4
5
6
7
8


CRITTER CAPSULE  (SUBSCRIPTION)  page 3       © 20 21, RAFT  Core Content Skills: 
 
Science & Engineering 
(NGSS)  
 
Developing and Using 
Models, Planning and 
Conducting 
Investigations , Analyzing 
and Interpreting Data, 
Forces and Motion, Types 
of Interactions, Cause and 
Effect, Characteristics of 
Living Things  
 
Social Emotional Learning  
• Self-awareness  
• Self-management  
• Responsible decision -
making  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Content Behind the Activity  
Every object has a center of mass, which is the object’s balance point. The balance 
point of the capsule changes as the ball moves inside it. The irregular motion of the 
capsule occurs because the ball has much more mass than th e capsule. Small 
movements of the marble will cause large movements of the capsule as a new 
balance point is created for the two combined items. Since mass is a measure of an 
object’s inertia (its resistance to change in its motion), a shift in the center of mass 
causes a change in the moment of inertia, which is observe d as the wobbling and 
jerking motion of the capsule.  
 
Life can be difficult to define.  Living organisms have systems for metabolism, growth, 
reproduction, and response to stimuli. Although the Critter Capsule appears to move 
on its own and respond to stimuli, it does not exhibit any of the other characteristics 
that would classify it as being alive.  
 
Do all living things have all the characteristics of life? No! A real -world example of an 
unusual organism is a virus, which responds to its environment  and moves but 
cannot reproduce on its own or even with other viruses.  Viruses are the except ion to 
the typical criteria used to define living things. As life scientists  learn more about 
such anomalies, they sometimes must refine the criteria to account  for these 
unusual organisms.  
 
Reuse  
This kit uses 100% reusable materials  designed for other uses. To continue making a 
positive impact in reducing  waste, reuse these materials in other projects.  
Additionally,  any unused materials can be collected and delivered back to RAFT.  
 
Feedback  
Please comment on this kit by taking this sh ort survey : http://bit.ly/RAFTkitsurvey . 
Let us know of any material concern s (missing, broken, or p oorly fitting parts ) as well 
as any suggestions for  improvement . 
 
Visit https://raft.net  to view related activities!  
 
Force Meter  
Gravity Defying Frog  
Rolling Maze  
Where is the Life?  
Resources  
• Characteristics of life video  - https://bit.ly/30CCuSU   
• Information on character istics of life  - https://bit.ly/2QGgWge   
 
 